Instruction to set up Stable Diffusion to run on ORT-DML (#399)
microsoft/DirectML: docs/CompVis_Stable_Diffusion_Instructions.md

# Running CompVis Stable Diffusion on a Single GPU with ONNX Runtime and DirectML

> This instruction downloads and set up CompVis Stable Diffusion v1.4 model through the Hugging Face diffusers and transformers library. It pulls relevant Python packages that allows the model to run on most discrete consumer graphics GPUs with ONNX Runtime on the DirectML execution provider. This instruction is based on the prior work of [Neil McAlister](https://www.travelneil.com/stable-diffusion-windows-amd.html) with the more up-to-date script version from the Hugging Face Diffusers repo and its dependency packages as well as additional conversion steps for better execution performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These instructions download and set up the CompVis Stable Diffusion v1.4 model through the Hugging Face diffusers and transformers library. It pulls relevant Python packages that allow the model to run on most discrete consumer graphics GPUs with ONNX Runtime atop the DirectML execution provider. These instructions are based on the prior work of [Neil McAlister](https://www.travelneil.com/stable-diffusion-windows-amd.html) with the more up-to-date script version from the Hugging Face Diffusers repo and its dependency packages, as well as additional conversion steps for better execution performance.

Author: Thanks. Please look again in the new commit.

Reviewer: Appears only the topmost suggestion was accepted. How about the other suggestions below too?

Author: See again. (For some reason I didn't see the rest of the comments until now)

Reviewer: Glad you wrote these. :)

## Installing Dependency Packages

We need a few Python packages, namely the Hugging Face script libraries for transformers and diffusers along with ONNX Runtime for DirectML.

```
pip install diffusers transformers onnxruntime-directml onnx
```

### Hardware Requirement

> Since it is still necessary for the entire model to fit within the GPU memory while executing. An ideal GPU to run this model with should have 8GB of VRAM available. Here are a few examples:

Reviewer: Since the entire model must fit within the GPU memory while executing, a GPU should have at least 8GB of VRAM available to run this model. Here are a few examples:

- NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2070 or later
- AMD Radeon RX 6500 XT (8GB) or later
- Intel Arc A750 Graphics or later 

## Downloading the Model

> We first need to download the model from Hugging Face. You need an account at Hugging Face, so if you haven't done so, now is the time. Once you've set up a Hugging Face account, go generate an access token (just follow their instruction in the web site).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We first need to download the model from Hugging Face, for which you need an account. So if you haven't created one, now is the time. Once you've set up a Hugging Face account, generate an access token (just follow their instructions in the web site).
```

## Converting to ONNX

The model is trained with PyTorch so it can naturally convert to ONNX. Since we'll be using DirectML through ONNX Runtime, this step is needed. The script `convert_stable_diffusion_checkpoint_to_onnx.py` you already have here is just a local copy of the same file from the [Hugging Face diffusers GitHub repo](https://github.com/HuggingFace/diffusers/blob/main/scripts/convert_stable_diffusion_checkpoint_to_onnx.py), so you don't need to clone that repo.

```
python convert_stable_diffusion_checkpoint_to_onnx.py --model_path="CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4" --output_path="./stable_diffusion_onnx" --fp16
```

This will run the conversion and put the result ONNX files under the `stable_diffusion_onnx` folder. For better performance, we recommend you convert the model to half-precision floating point data type using the `--fp16` option.

> _Note: As of this writing, you cannot run this `--fp16` option until you have installed CUDA support with Torch packages using the following instruction. This will require up to 3 GB of additional disk space._

Reviewer: > This will require up to 3 GB of additional disk space.

Oof, I wonder if we should recommend just post-processing the float32 using some other tool (e.g. I believe there ONNXML tools that could do float32 -> float16?), rather than an extra 3GB download? 😳

Author: We will update these instructions as we go. For now we need to stick with the standard FP16 conversion. The special script from Tianlei performs fusions specific to CUDA EP, which we still do not support in the DML EP.

```
pip install torch>=1.13.0+cu116 torchvision>=0.13.0+cu116 torchaudio>=0.13.0 --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu116
```

## Running the ONNX Model

> You'll need a script that looks like what in the `text2image.py` file as follow. On a mid-range NVIDIA RTX 2070, a single image currently takes 20 seconds to generate from a prompt. It'll take up to 10 mins on the CPU.

Reviewer: I'm curious how many steps you run with by default, 25 or 50? (not asking for any document change here, just curious, because mine take about 4 minutes on CPU, but that's 25 steps)

Author: I don't recall. It's approaching 10 mins on my machine before I decided to stop.

```python
# (test/run.py)
from diffusers import StableDiffusionOnnxPipeline
pipe = StableDiffusionOnnxPipeline.from_pretrained("./stable_diffusion_onnx", provider="DmlExecutionProvider")
prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars."
image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
image.save("./result.png")
```

### A Debugging Note
When running this script inside VSCode, the relative path specified here is relative to the base location of your project folder and not the location of your script file. To fix that up, configure the `cwd` (i.e. "current working directory") option in your launch.json file as follows:

```json
    // .vscode/launch.json
    "configurations": [
        {
            "name": "Python: Current File",
            "type": "python",
            "request": "launch",
            "program": "${file}",
            "cwd": "${workspaceFolder}/test/",
            "console": "integratedTerminal",
            "justMyCode": true

>         }

Reviewer: Curiously the lines below ("If you have an NVIDIA...") all appear in red on GitHub's diff view 🤔. I wonder if it's because of the missing `]` here?

Reviewer: Yeah, that fixed it - looks normal now.

Author: Appeared fine to me, but see if putting in a closing bracket helps.

```

> If you have an NVIDIA graphics card and want to try running the ONNX model on CUDA with, just replace the `onnxruntime-directml` package with `onnxruntime-gpu` package. Do not keep them both. Then replace the `"DmlExecutionProvider"` name in the running script `run.py` with `"CUDAExecutionProvider"`. You may need to install NVIDIA CUDA libraries separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have an NVIDIA graphics card and want to try running the ONNX model on CUDA, just replace the `onnxruntime-directml` package with the `onnxruntime-gpu` package. Do not keep them both. Then replace the `"DmlExecutionProvider"` name in the running script `run.py` with `"CUDAExecutionProvider"`. You may need to install NVIDIA CUDA libraries separately.
```
